Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs.
Begin by outlining how they fit into haemostasis.
Haemostasis has two arms that these drugs target.
Primary haemostasis is the formation of the platelet plug:
platelets adhere to exposed subendothelium, are activated, and aggregate,
a process the antiplatelet drugs inhibit.
Secondary haemostasis is the coagulation cascade,
a series of enzymatic steps in which clotting factors are sequentially activated,
converging on the activation of factor ten,
then the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin,
which converts fibrinogen to fibrin, stabilising the clot;
the anticoagulants act at various points of this cascade.
The system is balanced by natural anticoagulants — antithrombin,
proteins C and S — and by fibrinolysis, which breaks the clot down.
So the antiplatelet drugs inhibit the platelet plug of primary haemostasis,
and the anticoagulants inhibit the coagulation cascade of secondary haemostasis,
and understanding where each acts explains its monitoring,
its reversal and its perioperative management.
Describe unfractionated heparin.
Unfractionated heparin is a naturally occurring polysaccharide that acts
indirectly, by binding and potentiating the natural anticoagulant antithrombin,
accelerating its inactivation of thrombin, factor two-a, and factor ten-a,
so it inhibits the cascade at these points.
Given intravenously it acts immediately, with a short half-life,
so it is given by infusion and is readily titratable,
monitored by the activated partial thromboplastin time or by anti-factor-ten-a
levels.
It is used where rapid, controllable anticoagulation is needed,
such as in cardiac and vascular surgery and acute thrombosis.
Its advantages are its rapid onset,
short action and complete reversibility by protamine.
Its adverse effects are bleeding, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and,
with long use, osteoporosis.
So unfractionated heparin potentiates antithrombin to inhibit thrombin and factor
ten-a, acting rapidly and briefly, monitored by the activated partial
thromboplastin time and fully reversed by protamine,
with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia an important complication.
Describe the low-molecular-weight heparins and fondaparinux.
The low-molecular-weight heparins, such as enoxaparin and dalteparin,
are fragments of heparin that, because of their smaller size,
preferentially potentiate antithrombin's inactivation of factor ten-a rather than
thrombin.
They have a more predictable response,
allowing fixed weight-based subcutaneous dosing once or twice daily without routine
monitoring, which makes them convenient for the prophylaxis and treatment of venous
thromboembolism.
They are renally cleared, so they accumulate in renal failure,
where the dose is reduced or monitored by anti-factor-ten-a levels,
as also in pregnancy and obesity. They are only partially reversed by protamine.
Fondaparinux is a synthetic pentasaccharide that selectively potentiates
antithrombin against factor ten-a alone;
it is renally cleared and not reversed by protamine.
So the low-molecular-weight heparins and fondaparinux act mainly or solely against
factor ten-a, giving predictable subcutaneous dosing without routine monitoring,
with renal accumulation and incomplete or absent protamine reversal as their
cautions.
Describe warfarin.
Warfarin is the classic oral anticoagulant, a vitamin K antagonist.
It inhibits the enzyme that recycles vitamin K,
which is required for the gamma-carboxylation of the clotting factors two, seven,
nine and ten, and of the natural anticoagulants proteins C and S;
so it reduces the functional levels of these factors.
Because it acts on the synthesis of new factors, its onset is slow, over days,
as the existing factors are cleared,
and there is an early procoagulant tendency as the short-lived proteins C and S
fall first.
It is monitored by the international normalised ratio,
has a narrow therapeutic index, and has numerous food and drug interactions through
diet and cytochrome P450.
It is used for atrial fibrillation, venous thromboembolism and, importantly,
mechanical heart valves, for which the direct oral anticoagulants are not suitable.
So warfarin is a vitamin K antagonist reducing factors two, seven, nine and ten,
slow in onset, monitored by the international normalised ratio,
with many interactions, and remains essential for mechanical valves.
Describe the direct oral anticoagulants.
The direct oral anticoagulants act directly on a single clotting factor,
without antithrombin. They are of two kinds:
the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran, which inhibits factor two-a;
and the direct factor ten-a inhibitors — rivaroxaban, apixaban and edoxaban.
They have transformed anticoagulation because they are given orally in fixed doses
with a predictable effect and so do not require routine monitoring,
have fewer food and drug interactions than warfarin,
and have a rapid onset and offset.
They are used for atrial fibrillation and for the treatment and prevention of
venous thromboembolism, and are now generally preferred to warfarin for these,
being at least as effective with less intracranial bleeding;
but they are contraindicated in mechanical heart valves and depend on renal,
and for some hepatic, clearance, so they accumulate in renal impairment.
So the direct oral anticoagulants directly inhibit thrombin or factor ten-a,
giving predictable fixed-dose oral anticoagulation without routine monitoring,
now first-line for atrial fibrillation and venous thromboembolism but not for
mechanical valves.
Describe aspirin as an antiplatelet drug.
Aspirin is the foundational antiplatelet drug.
It irreversibly inhibits the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase by acetylating it,
and in the platelet this blocks the production of thromboxane A2,
a potent promoter of platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction.
Because the platelet has no nucleus and cannot synthesise new enzyme,
the inhibition lasts the platelet's lifetime, around seven to ten days,
so the antiplatelet effect persists until enough new platelets are formed,
even though the drug itself is cleared quickly;
a low dose suffices for the antiplatelet effect.
It is used widely in the secondary prevention of arterial thrombotic disease —
ischaemic heart disease, stroke, peripheral arterial disease — and in acute
coronary syndromes. Its main adverse effects are gastrointestinal irritation and
bleeding.
So aspirin irreversibly inhibits platelet cyclo-oxygenase,
abolishing thromboxane-mediated aggregation for the platelet's lifespan,
the basis of its use in arterial disease and of the prolonged effect relevant to
surgery.
Describe the P2Y12 inhibitors and the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists.
The P2Y12-receptor inhibitors block the platelet receptor for adenosine
diphosphate, a key amplifier of platelet activation,
complementing aspirin in dual antiplatelet therapy.
Clopidogrel is a prodrug requiring hepatic activation,
with an irreversible effect lasting the platelet lifespan and variable response
owing to genetic and drug influences on its activation,
including the interaction with omeprazole.
Prasugrel is a more potent, reliably effective irreversible agent.
Ticagrelor is a directly acting, reversible inhibitor with a faster offset.
They are used in acute coronary syndromes and after coronary stenting, with aspirin.
The glycoprotein two-b-three-a antagonists — abciximab,
tirofiban — block the final common receptor for platelet aggregation and are potent
intravenous agents used in percutaneous coronary intervention.
So the P2Y12 inhibitors block adenosine-diphosphate-mediated activation,
clopidogrel being an irreversible prodrug and ticagrelor a reversible agent,
and the glycoprotein two-b-three-a antagonists block the final aggregation step in
coronary intervention.
What are the main indications for anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy?
The two classes serve different territories.
Anticoagulants, acting on the cascade,
are used where thrombosis occurs in low-flow or venous and cardiac-source settings:
the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism — deep vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism; the prevention of stroke in atrial fibrillation;
and mechanical heart valves, for which warfarin is required.
Antiplatelet drugs, acting on platelets,
are used where thrombosis is arterial and platelet-driven on atheroma:
secondary prevention in ischaemic heart disease,
stroke and peripheral arterial disease;
and acute coronary syndromes and after coronary stenting,
where dual antiplatelet therapy is used.
There is some overlap and combination in particular situations.
So anticoagulants are for venous thromboembolism,
atrial fibrillation and mechanical valves,
and antiplatelets for arterial atherothrombotic disease and coronary intervention,
the distinction reflecting the venous-versus-arterial,
cascade-versus-platelet nature of the thrombosis.
How are these drugs monitored?
Monitoring differs by drug. Unfractionated heparin is monitored by the activated
partial thromboplastin time, kept within a target ratio,
or by anti-factor-ten-a levels, and in cardiac surgery by the activated clotting
time.
The low-molecular-weight heparins do not need routine monitoring because of their
predictable effect, but anti-factor-ten-a levels are used in renal failure,
pregnancy, obesity and the very small or large.
Warfarin requires regular monitoring of the international normalised ratio,
with a target range according to the indication.
The direct oral anticoagulants are designed not to need routine monitoring,
though specific assays exist for emergencies.
Antiplatelet effect is not routinely monitored,
though platelet function tests exist.
So heparin is monitored by the activated partial thromboplastin time or
anti-factor-ten-a, warfarin by the international normalised ratio,
the low-molecular-weight heparins and direct oral anticoagulants generally not
routinely, which reflects the predictability of their effect.
What is heparin-induced thrombocytopenia?
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is a serious immune complication of heparin,
more common with unfractionated than low-molecular-weight heparin.
In its important form it is mediated by antibodies against a complex of heparin and
platelet factor four, which activate platelets,
causing a fall in the platelet count,
typically five to ten days after starting heparin, and — paradoxically,
despite the thrombocytopenia — a prothrombotic state with venous and arterial
thrombosis.
It is suspected from the timing and the platelet fall,
confirmed by antibody and functional tests, and managed by stopping all heparin,
including flushes, and anticoagulating with a non-heparin alternative such as a
direct thrombin inhibitor, because the thrombotic risk persists;
platelet transfusion is avoided.
So heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is an antibody-mediated,
prothrombotic fall in platelets some days into heparin therapy,
managed by stopping heparin and substituting a non-heparin anticoagulant,
an important hazard particularly of unfractionated heparin.
How are anticoagulants managed in the perioperative period?
Perioperative management balances the thrombotic risk of stopping against the
bleeding risk of continuing, individualised to the drug,
the indication and the surgery.
Warfarin is usually stopped about five days before surgery to allow the
international normalised ratio to normalise,
with bridging by a heparin in high-thrombotic-risk patients such as those with
mechanical valves or recent thromboembolism, and restarted postoperatively.
The direct oral anticoagulants are stopped a defined number of doses before,
according to the drug, the renal function and the bleeding risk of surgery,
typically a day or two, without the need for bridging because of their predictable
offset, and restarted when haemostasis is secure.
Heparin infusions are stopped a few hours before.
For minor procedures anticoagulation may be continued.
So perioperative management means timed cessation — warfarin with bridging in
high-risk cases, the direct oral anticoagulants by their offset without bridging —
balancing thrombosis against bleeding, and timely restarting.
What are the implications of these drugs for regional and neuraxial anaesthesia?
This is critical, because a central neuraxial block — spinal or epidural — in an
anticoagulated patient risks a vertebral canal haematoma,
which can cause permanent paralysis,
so strict guidelines govern the timing between the drug and the block or catheter
removal.
There must be a sufficient interval after the last dose before performing or
removing the block — for example, around twelve hours after a prophylactic and
twenty-four hours after a treatment dose of low-molecular-weight heparin,
longer for the direct oral anticoagulants according to the agent and renal
function, and a normalised international normalised ratio for warfarin — and a
defined interval before the next dose after the block.
Antiplatelet drugs also matter: aspirin alone is generally acceptable,
but the P2Y12 inhibitors require cessation for several days.
So neuraxial anaesthesia demands strict adherence to time intervals between
anticoagulant and antiplatelet dosing and the block or catheter removal,
to prevent vertebral canal haematoma.
Pull it together: how do you use and manage these drugs rationally?
I would match the drug to the thrombotic problem — anticoagulants for venous
thromboembolism, atrial fibrillation and mechanical valves,
antiplatelets for arterial atherothrombotic disease and coronary stents — and use
the agent's pharmacology to guide monitoring, reversal and perioperative handling.
I would choose a direct oral anticoagulant over warfarin for most atrial
fibrillation and venous thromboembolism,
reserving warfarin for mechanical valves and where direct agents are unsuitable,
and use heparin where rapid, reversible, titratable anticoagulation is needed.
I would monitor appropriately, watch for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia,
and manage the perioperative period by timed cessation — bridging warfarin in
high-risk cases, stopping the direct agents by their offset — balancing thrombosis
against bleeding.
I would rigorously observe the timing rules for neuraxial anaesthesia to prevent
vertebral canal haematoma, and ensure appropriate reversal agents are available.
So rational use matches the drug to the thrombosis and manages its monitoring,
perioperative timing and neuraxial safety according to its pharmacology.
Outline the coagulation cascade as a framework for these drugs.
The coagulation cascade is a sequence of zymogen activations traditionally divided
into two initiating arms converging on a common pathway.
The intrinsic, or contact, pathway — involving factors twelve, eleven,
nine and eight — is reflected in the activated partial thromboplastin time.
The extrinsic pathway — tissue factor activating factor seven — is reflected in the
prothrombin time.
Both converge on the common pathway at the activation of factor ten to ten-a,
which, with factor five, converts prothrombin, factor two, to thrombin;
thrombin converts fibrinogen to fibrin and activates factor thirteen to cross-link
it, and amplifies the cascade.
In vivo, coagulation is better understood as a cell-based, tissue-factor-initiated,
thrombin-amplified process on platelet surfaces.
So the cascade converges on factor ten-a and thrombin,
which is precisely where the anticoagulants act — the heparins and factor Xa
inhibitors on factor ten-a, the direct thrombin inhibitors and warfarin-depleted
factors on thrombin — making the cascade the map for understanding them.
Describe the direct thrombin inhibitors used in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
When anticoagulation is needed in a patient with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia,
in whom all heparin must be avoided, a non-heparin anticoagulant is required,
and the parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors are the established choice.
Argatroban is a synthetic direct thrombin inhibitor, hepatically metabolised,
so it is preferred in renal impairment,
given by infusion and monitored by the activated partial thromboplastin time.
Bivalirudin is a direct thrombin inhibitor used particularly during percutaneous
coronary intervention and as an alternative anticoagulant in cardiac surgery in
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, with a short half-life.
These act directly on thrombin without antithrombin and without cross-reacting with
the heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibodies.
So in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia the parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors
argatroban and bivalirudin provide anticoagulation without heparin,
argatroban favoured in renal impairment and bivalirudin in coronary intervention,
an important application distinct from the oral dabigatran.
Compare the pharmacokinetics and renal handling of the direct oral anticoagulants.
The direct oral anticoagulants differ in their handling,
which matters for dosing and perioperative timing.
Dabigatran, the thrombin inhibitor,
is predominantly renally excreted — around eighty per cent — so it accumulates
markedly in renal impairment and requires the longest cessation before surgery in
renal dysfunction, and it is dialysable.
Among the factor ten-a inhibitors, rivaroxaban and edoxaban have substantial renal
excretion, while apixaban is the least renally dependent,
with greater hepatobiliary elimination,
so apixaban is often preferred in renal impairment.
All have half-lives of around half a day, allowing once- or twice-daily dosing,
and reach peak effect within a few hours. Their renal dependence means renal
function must be checked and the dose and the preoperative cessation interval
adjusted accordingly.
So the direct oral anticoagulants share rapid onset and a half-day half-life but
differ in renal dependence — dabigatran most,
apixaban least — which guides dosing and perioperative timing in renal impairment.
Discuss dual antiplatelet therapy and its duration after coronary stenting.
After coronary stenting, dual antiplatelet therapy — aspirin combined with a P2Y12
inhibitor — is given to prevent stent thrombosis, a catastrophic event,
while the stent endothelialises.
Its duration depends on the stent and the clinical context:
after a drug-eluting stent, which endothelialises more slowly,
a course of around six to twelve months is typical,
longer after an acute coronary syndrome and shorter where bleeding risk is high;
bare-metal stents required a shorter minimum.
The crucial perioperative principle is that elective surgery is deferred until the
mandatory period of dual therapy is complete,
because stopping a P2Y12 inhibitor prematurely sharply raises the risk of stent
thrombosis; if surgery cannot wait,
aspirin is usually continued and the timing of P2Y12 cessation discussed with
cardiology.
So dual antiplatelet therapy after stenting lasts months according to the stent and
context, and elective surgery is deferred until it is complete to avoid stent
thrombosis — a key perioperative decision.
How is anticoagulation managed in pregnancy?
Anticoagulation in pregnancy requires agents safe for the fetus.
Warfarin is teratogenic, crossing the placenta to cause a characteristic
embryopathy in the first trimester and fetal bleeding later,
so it is generally avoided, with the difficult exception of some mechanical heart
valves where its superior efficacy may be judged necessary.
The direct oral anticoagulants are avoided for lack of safety data and placental
transfer.
The anticoagulant of choice in pregnancy is therefore low-molecular-weight heparin,
which does not cross the placenta, used for the prevention and treatment of venous
thromboembolism, to which pregnancy predisposes,
with the dose adjusted as pregnancy progresses and monitored by anti-factor-ten-a
levels where needed.
Around delivery and neuraxial anaesthesia,
the timing of heparin doses is carefully managed.
So pregnancy anticoagulation uses low-molecular-weight heparin,
avoiding teratogenic warfarin and the unproven direct oral anticoagulants,
with careful peripartum and neuraxial timing.
What is the approach to anticoagulation in cancer-associated thrombosis?
Cancer predisposes to venous thromboembolism through a hypercoagulable state,
and these thromboses are more prone to recurrence and to bleeding on treatment.
Traditionally, low-molecular-weight heparin was the standard treatment,
shown to be more effective than warfarin in this setting and convenient in patients
with vomiting or poor oral intake.
More recently, the direct oral anticoagulants,
particularly the factor ten-a inhibitors,
have been shown to be effective alternatives and are now widely used,
with the caveat of a higher bleeding risk in certain cancers,
notably gastrointestinal and genitourinary tumours,
where low-molecular-weight heparin may still be preferred.
The choice considers the cancer site, bleeding risk,
drug interactions with chemotherapy,
and the patient's ability to take oral medication.
So cancer-associated thrombosis is treated with low-molecular-weight heparin or a
direct oral anticoagulant, the choice weighing efficacy against bleeding risk by
tumour site and the practicalities of the individual patient.
How is venous thromboembolism prophylaxis approached in the surgical patient?
Venous thromboembolism is a major preventable cause of perioperative morbidity and
mortality, so prophylaxis is guided by a formal risk assessment balancing the
patient's thrombotic risk — from the surgery, immobility, malignancy,
prior thromboembolism and other factors — against the bleeding risk.
It combines mechanical and pharmacological measures.
Mechanical prophylaxis — graduated compression stockings and intermittent pneumatic
compression — is used widely and especially where bleeding risk precludes drugs.
Pharmacological prophylaxis, usually with low-molecular-weight heparin,
or fondaparinux or a direct oral anticoagulant in some settings such as major joint
replacement, is added where the thrombotic risk outweighs the bleeding risk,
with attention to the timing around surgery and any neuraxial technique.
Early mobilisation and hydration help.
So venous thromboembolism prophylaxis follows a risk assessment,
combining mechanical measures with pharmacological prophylaxis — chiefly
low-molecular-weight heparin — balancing thrombosis against bleeding and
coordinating with regional anaesthesia.
Give the detail of the time intervals required for neuraxial anaesthesia.
The intervals are set to ensure the anticoagulant effect has waned before a
neuraxial needle or catheter is placed or removed,
to prevent vertebral canal haematoma, and they are defined by national guidelines.
For low-molecular-weight heparin, around twelve hours should elapse after a
prophylactic dose and around twenty-four hours after a treatment dose before the
block or catheter removal, with the next dose delayed several hours afterwards.
For unfractionated heparin, a shorter interval and a normal activated partial
thromboplastin time. For warfarin, a normalised international normalised ratio,
below about one and a half.
For the direct oral anticoagulants,
longer intervals of one to three days depending on the agent and renal function —
for example around three days for dabigatran in renal impairment.
For the P2Y12 inhibitors, cessation for around five to seven days;
aspirin alone is generally acceptable. So strict, drug-specific time intervals,
longer for treatment doses and renal impairment,
govern the safe timing of neuraxial techniques.
Describe the thrombolytic drugs briefly.
The thrombolytic, or fibrinolytic, drugs differ from anticoagulants in that they
actively break down formed clot rather than prevent its formation,
by converting plasminogen to plasmin, which digests fibrin.
The agents are mostly recombinant tissue plasminogen activators,
such as alteplase and tenecteplase, and the older streptokinase.
They are used where rapid clot lysis is needed and the benefit outweighs the
substantial bleeding risk: acute ischaemic stroke within a time window,
massive pulmonary embolism with haemodynamic compromise, and,
where primary angioplasty is unavailable, ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
Their major hazard is haemorrhage, including intracranial,
so there are strict contraindications relating to bleeding risk.
They are quite distinct from the prophylactic and treatment anticoagulants.
So the thrombolytics actively dissolve clot by activating plasmin, used for stroke,
massive pulmonary embolism and myocardial infarction within strict criteria,
with major bleeding as the defining risk — a different class from the
anticoagulants but part of the wider antithrombotic landscape.
What is the role of monitoring with anti-factor-Xa levels?
Anti-factor-ten-a assays measure the inhibitory activity against factor ten-a and
are used to monitor agents that act there when the usual clinical predictability
cannot be relied upon.
For the low-molecular-weight heparins, routine monitoring is unnecessary,
but anti-factor-ten-a levels are used in situations where the dose-response is
altered or the margin is critical — in significant renal impairment, in pregnancy,
in obesity and very low body weight,
and in neonates — to confirm an appropriate level.
The assay can also be calibrated to assess the effect of the direct factor ten-a
inhibitors qualitatively in emergencies, though they are not routinely monitored.
Unfractionated heparin can be monitored by an anti-factor-ten-a assay as an
alternative to the activated partial thromboplastin time.
So anti-factor-ten-a monitoring is reserved for low-molecular-weight heparin where
the response is unpredictable — renal impairment, pregnancy,
extremes of weight — and for assessing factor Xa inhibitor effect in emergencies,
rather than for routine use.
Summarise the perioperative decision-making for the anticoagulated patient.
I would make a structured, often multidisciplinary,
plan weighing the thrombotic risk of interruption against the bleeding risk of the
surgery and any neuraxial technique.
I would establish the drug, the indication and its thrombotic risk — a mechanical
valve or recent thromboembolism being high risk — and the bleeding risk of the
procedure.
For warfarin I would stop it about five days before,
bridge high-risk patients with heparin,
and confirm a normalised international normalised ratio.
For the direct oral anticoagulants I would stop them for the appropriate number of
doses by the agent, the renal function and the bleeding risk, without bridging.
For antiplatelets I would usually continue aspirin and, for stents,
defer elective surgery until dual therapy is complete,
discussing P2Y12 cessation with cardiology.
I would observe the neuraxial timing rules and plan restarting.
So perioperative decision-making is an individualised, risk-balanced,
drug-specific plan for cessation, bridging, neuraxial timing and restarting.
Describe the physiology of vitamin K relevant to warfarin.
Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin essential for the gamma-carboxylation of
glutamate residues on the clotting factors two, seven,
nine and ten and on the natural anticoagulants proteins C and S,
a modification that allows these factors to bind calcium and phospholipid and so to
function.
In carrying out this carboxylation, vitamin K is oxidised,
and it is then regenerated by the enzyme vitamin K epoxide reductase.
Warfarin inhibits this reductase, depleting the active vitamin and so reducing the
functional clotting factors.
Vitamin K is obtained from the diet, particularly green leafy vegetables,
and from synthesis by gut bacteria, so changes in diet and in gut flora,
for example with antibiotics, alter the response to warfarin.
So vitamin K enables the carboxylation that activates factors two, seven,
nine and ten and proteins C and S, is recycled by the reductase that warfarin
blocks, and comes from diet and gut bacteria — physiology that explains warfarin's
action, its dietary interactions and its reversal by vitamin K.
What are the important interactions and INR targets of warfarin?
Warfarin has a narrow therapeutic index and numerous interactions,
making monitoring essential.
It is metabolised by cytochrome P450 enzymes,
so inhibitors — such as some antibiotics, amiodarone,
and many others — raise the international normalised ratio and bleeding risk,
while inducers lower it and reduce efficacy.
Its effect is potentiated by reduced vitamin K intake and by drugs affecting gut
flora, and by displacement from protein binding, and is altered by liver disease.
Antiplatelet drugs and other anticoagulants add to bleeding risk.
The international normalised ratio target depends on the indication:
a range around two to three for atrial fibrillation and venous thromboembolism,
and a higher range, around two and a half to three and a half,
for mechanical heart valves, particularly in the mitral position.
So warfarin interacts widely through cytochrome P450,
vitamin K and protein binding, requiring international-normalised-ratio monitoring
to a target set by the indication — around two to three for most,
higher for mechanical valves.
How has the use of aspirin in primary prevention changed?
The use of aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease — that is,
in people without established disease — has been substantially revised.
Where it was once widely recommended,
several large trials have shown that in primary prevention the modest reduction in
cardiovascular events is largely offset by an increase in major,
particularly gastrointestinal and intracranial, bleeding,
so that the net benefit is small or absent for most people.
Consequently, guidelines now generally do not recommend routine aspirin for primary
prevention, reserving it for selected higher-risk individuals after weighing
bleeding risk, and emphasising other risk-factor management.
Its value in secondary prevention — in those with established cardiovascular
disease — is unchanged and clear.
So aspirin is no longer routinely recommended for primary prevention because the
bleeding harm offsets the benefit in low-risk people,
while its role in secondary prevention remains firmly established — an important
shift in practice.
How is heparin-induced thrombocytopenia diagnosed?
The diagnosis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia combines clinical probability
with laboratory testing.
The clinical likelihood is assessed with a scoring system, the four-Ts score,
which considers the degree of thrombocytopenia,
its timing in relation to heparin exposure — typically a fall five to ten days
after starting — the occurrence of new thrombosis,
and the absence of other causes of the low platelet count.
A low score makes the diagnosis unlikely and avoids unnecessary action;
an intermediate or high score prompts laboratory confirmation.
The laboratory tests detect the antibodies against the heparin–platelet-factor-four
complex — an immunoassay, which is sensitive but not specific — and confirm their
platelet-activating capacity with a functional assay such as the serotonin-release
assay, which is specific.
So heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is diagnosed by combining the four-Ts clinical
probability score with antibody immunoassays and confirmatory functional testing,
ensuring heparin is stopped and substituted when the diagnosis is likely while
avoiding overdiagnosis.
What does the evidence say about bridging anticoagulation?
Bridging — giving a short-acting anticoagulant,
usually low-molecular-weight heparin,
while warfarin is interrupted for surgery — was once widely practised to minimise
the time without anticoagulation, but its routine use has been questioned by
evidence.
A trial of bridging in atrial fibrillation, the BRIDGE study,
found that in patients without a very high thrombotic risk,
forgoing bridging was non-inferior for preventing thromboembolism and resulted in
less major bleeding, so bridging caused harm without benefit in that group.
The result is that bridging is now reserved for those at genuinely high thrombotic
risk — such as a recent venous thromboembolism, certain mechanical valves,
or recent stroke — in whom the thrombotic risk of interruption justifies it,
while lower-risk patients have warfarin simply withheld and restarted.
So the evidence has narrowed bridging to high-thrombotic-risk patients,
since in others it increases bleeding without reducing thromboembolism — a notable
change in perioperative practice.
Why are the direct oral anticoagulants unsuitable for mechanical heart valves?
The direct oral anticoagulants are contraindicated for mechanical heart valves
because the evidence shows them to be inferior and unsafe in this setting.
A trial of dabigatran in patients with mechanical valves was stopped early because
dabigatran was associated with more thromboembolic events — valve thrombosis and
stroke — and more bleeding than warfarin.
The thrombogenic surface of a mechanical valve activates coagulation through the
contact pathway in a way that the vitamin K antagonist warfarin,
which depletes multiple factors, controls effectively but the single-target direct
agents do not.
Consequently warfarin remains the required anticoagulant for mechanical heart
valves, with a higher international-normalised-ratio target.
So the direct oral anticoagulants are unsuitable for mechanical valves because they
proved inferior to warfarin, with more thrombosis and bleeding,
leaving warfarin the essential agent for these patients — a key exception to the
general preference for the direct agents.
What is antiphospholipid syndrome and its anticoagulation?
Antiphospholipid syndrome is an autoimmune disorder characterised by
antiphospholipid antibodies — such as the lupus anticoagulant — and a markedly
increased risk of venous and arterial thrombosis and of pregnancy morbidity.
It is relevant to anticoagulation in two ways.
First, the lupus anticoagulant can prolong phospholipid-dependent clotting tests
such as the activated partial thromboplastin time in the laboratory,
despite the patient being prothrombotic, which can confuse monitoring.
Second, anticoagulation of thrombotic antiphospholipid syndrome is generally with
warfarin, and importantly the direct oral anticoagulants have been found less
effective, particularly in high-risk triple-antibody-positive patients,
so warfarin is preferred; in pregnancy,
low-molecular-weight heparin with aspirin is used.
So antiphospholipid syndrome is a prothrombotic autoimmune condition in which
warfarin is preferred over the direct oral anticoagulants for thrombosis,
low-molecular-weight heparin and aspirin are used in pregnancy,
and the lupus anticoagulant can confound clotting tests — a condition with specific
anticoagulation implications.
Describe dipyridamole and the wider antiplatelet picture.
Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet drug with a different mechanism from aspirin and
the P2Y12 inhibitors: it inhibits the cellular uptake and breakdown of adenosine
and inhibits phosphodiesterase, raising platelet cyclic AMP and so reducing
platelet activation, and it has some vasodilator effect.
It is used, often as a modified-release preparation combined with aspirin,
for the secondary prevention of ischaemic stroke and transient ischaemic attack.
Its adverse effects include headache, from its vasodilatation,
and gastrointestinal upset.
It is also used pharmacologically as a coronary vasodilator in myocardial perfusion
stress testing.
Placed in the wider picture, the antiplatelet drugs act at complementary points —
aspirin on thromboxane, the P2Y12 inhibitors on the adenosine-diphosphate receptor,
dipyridamole on adenosine and cyclic AMP,
and the glycoprotein antagonists on the final receptor — allowing rational
combination.
So dipyridamole raises platelet cyclic AMP via adenosine and phosphodiesterase,
used with aspirin in stroke prevention,
completing the complementary mechanisms of the antiplatelet drugs.
Summarise the choice between warfarin and a direct oral anticoagulant.
I would choose between them by the indication and the patient.
For most patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation or venous thromboembolism,
I would now prefer a direct oral anticoagulant,
because they give predictable fixed-dose oral anticoagulation without routine
monitoring, have fewer interactions, a rapid onset and offset,
and at least equal efficacy with less intracranial bleeding,
and they have specific reversal agents.
I would choose warfarin where the direct agents are contraindicated or unsuitable —
mechanical heart valves, significant mitral stenosis,
high-risk antiphospholipid syndrome,
severe renal impairment in which the renally cleared direct agents accumulate,
and where monitoring is needed or cost dictates — accepting the need for
international-normalised-ratio monitoring and the management of its interactions.
So the direct oral anticoagulants are first-line for most atrial fibrillation and
venous thromboembolism, while warfarin remains essential for mechanical valves,
high-risk antiphospholipid syndrome and some renal and other situations — the
choice individualised to the indication and patient.
Thank you. A thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Antiplatelet drugs inhibit the platelet plug of primary haemostasis
(arterial, atherothrombotic disease);
anticoagulants inhibit the coagulation cascade of secondary haemostasis (venous
thromboembolism, atrial fibrillation, mechanical valves).
Second, Unfractionated heparin potentiates antithrombin against thrombin and factor
Xa — rapid, short-acting, monitored by APTT, fully reversed by protamine,
with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia a key risk;
LMWHs and fondaparinux act mainly/only on factor Xa with predictable subcutaneous
dosing, renal accumulation and incomplete/absent protamine reversal.
Third, Warfarin (vitamin K antagonist; factors II, VII, IX,
X and proteins C/S) is slow, INR-monitored,
interaction-prone and essential for mechanical valves;
DOACs (dabigatran — thrombin; rivaroxaban/apixaban/edoxaban — factor Xa) give
predictable fixed-dose oral anticoagulation without routine monitoring,
now first-line for AF/VTE but not for mechanical valves.
Fourth, Aspirin irreversibly inhibits platelet COX/thromboxane for the platelet
lifespan (7–10 days); P2Y12 inhibitors (clopidogrel — irreversible prodrug;
ticagrelor — reversible) block ADP-mediated activation;
GP IIb/IIIa antagonists block the final aggregation step in PCI.
Fifth, Perioperatively, balance thrombosis against bleeding with timed cessation
(warfarin ~5 days with heparin bridging in high-risk cases;
DOACs by their offset without bridging);
rigorously observe the time intervals between anticoagulant/antiplatelet dosing and
neuraxial block or catheter removal to prevent vertebral canal haematoma.
Thank you. That concludes the station.